# Elastic Interval Geometry

How do shapes exist and maintain integrity in space over time? What is necessary for a model to real enough to be useful? The best way to approach these fundamental questions is to go back to first principles, and shave off any complexity that is not strictly necessary with [Occam's Razor](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Occam%27s_razor).

Elastic Interval Geometry is a model of shapes in space and time which strives to be as simple as possible. To understand the model, it's best to think of the different parts one at a time, and it seems to work well to personify them. We will jump around between the identies of the parts as tiny robots to see what each of them knows, and what each of them does.

## Pure Pairwise Push & Pull

To make the simplest shape, the tetrahedron, how many elements are necessary? A tetrahedron is made of four points in 3D space which don't all occupy the same flat plane. There are six relationships between four points, and since these are now meeting points, we will call them **joints**.

If the tetrahedron exists in time, there must be something which describes what happens between one moment and the next. A simple model would be to have the six point-to-point relationships act on the joints by pushing or pulling them. We will call the relationships **intervals** and have them push and pull in a pairwise fashion, acting **elastic**.

## Time

Time is an endless subject of discussion in philosophy as well as in physics. For the purpose of the elastic interval model, all we need is a kind of **fairness**. A *joint* where several pushing and pulling *intervals* meet should decide where to go without picking favorite *intervals* at any given moment. 

If only some of the *intervals* were to be activated at a time, the *joint* may jerk suddenly in one direction. Later, the other *intervals* may be activated, causing the *joint* to jerk again in the other direction. A jerky model would not be very authentic so, the model of time that we will use will operate in a sweeping fashon, where every element gets an opportunity to activate during the same moment.

In other words all parts if the entire model, however many *intervals* and *joints*, will experience an entire moment simultaneously and be finished with it before the next moment. The moments effectively **sweep** through the whole model, exactly the way it happens in [cellular automata](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cellular_automaton).

This kind of time is more the way we thought about it before Einstein wrapped it up together with space and everything got weird. One day we might go there (note the *interval* has its name to keep the door open for "time interval") but for now, we'll stick with Newton's time.

## Split Moments

The dance performed by these *joints* and *intervals* is animated by splitting a **moment** in two: first sweeping through the *intervals*, and then through the *joints*. During each *moment*, the *intervals* will each express their discomfort and the *joints* will each strive to find the best compromise.

A *joint* knows where it is in space, but an *interval* doesn't. An *interval* only knows about the two *joints* that it touches, and whether they are too close to each other or too far apart. An *interval* is not aware of the fact that the world has three space dimensions, since it lives in its own one-dimensional world.

During an *interval* sweep, every *interval* is activated in turn, which means that it has an opportunity to express itself. If the *interval's* two *joints* are too close it will ask the *joints* to move away, and if they're too far it will ask them to get more together.

When the *interval* sweep is finished, all *intervals* have expressed themselves, and the model is ready for the *joint* sweep. *Joints* have been accumulating requests from the various *interval* ends touching them, but a *joint* interprets each request differently since it knows about three dimensions. The *joint* interprets the one-dimensional requests by combining them with the direction of each *interval*, turning them into **direction** requests.

A *joint's* job is to mediate between the different *intervals* and try to satisfy them as well as it can, so it weighs all of the direction requests to decide where to jump. The new position in space should be the best compromise between the needs of the *intervals*.

When all *joints* have jumped, the *moment* is finished and the model begins the next *moment*. Once again the *intervals* will express their discomfort and the *joints* will strive to find the best compromise.

## Push + Pull = Twist

What if some *intervals* only ever **push** while others only ever **pull**? They may find that they are too long or too short, but a *push interval* can only ask the joints to move further apart and a *pull interval* can only ask them to move together.

Suddenly, some shapes like the tetrahedron described above can no longer be built! The best stable thing we can make is a flat shape.

[flat shape][flat]

A tetrahedron needs its intervals to *both push and pull* to maintain its volume. If we want to have volume but we only have *pushes* and *pulls* to work with, we need some more parts. To be precise, at a minimum we need three *pushes* and nine *pulls*. We call this the **twist**.

[left and right twists][twists]

Unlike the tetrahedron, the *twist* has an orientation, so is either a *left twist* or a *right twist*. We can put *twists* together like building blocks.

## Floating Push

When we experience the *twists* as physical structures, they appear to have a beautiful elegance. The *pushes* are suspended *separate from each other* in a network of *pulls*. If we connect different *twists* together, we can be careful to keep this elegance by never letting *pushes* touch each other.

With the added rule that *pushes* may never touch each other, we get a structure called a **tensegrity**.







